12.3 APPROXIMATION ALGORITHMS FOR NP HARD PROBLEMS

Although approximation algorithms run a gamut in level of sophistication 
most of them are based on some problem-specific heuristic. A heuristic is a common-sense rule drawn from experience rather than from a mathematically proved assertion. For example, going to the nearest unvisited city in the traveling salesman problem is a good illustration of this notion. We discuss an algorithm based on this heuristic later in this section. 

DEFINITION A polynomial-time approximation algorithm is said to be a capproximation algorithm, where c::: 1, if the accuracy ratio of the approximation it produces does not exceed c for any instance of the problem in quesiton:
			r(sa) <= c

The best (i.e., the smallest) value of c for which inequality (12.3) holds for all instances of the problem is called the peiformance ratio of the algorithm and denoted RA· 



Nearest-neighbor algorithm
The following simple greedy algorithm is based on the nearest-neighbor heuristic: the idea of always going to the nearest unvisited city next.

Step 1 Choose an arbitrary city as the start.

Step 2 Repeat the following operation until all the cities have been visited: go to the unvisited city nearest the one visited last (ties can be broken arbitrarily).

Step 3 Return to the starting city. 


Multifragment-heuristic algorithm

Step 1 Sort the edges in increasing order of their weights. (Ties can be broken arbitrarily.) Initialize the set of tour edges to be constructed to the empty set.

Step 2 Repeat this step until a tour of length n is obtained, where n is the number of cities in the instance being solved: add the next edge on the sorted edge list to the set of tour edges, provided this addition does not create a vertex of degree 3 or a cycle of length less than n; otherwise, skip the edge.

Step 3 Return the set of tour edges. 


Minimum-spanning-tree-based algorithms There are approximation algorithms for the traveling salesman problem that exploit a connection between Hamiltonian circuits and spanning trees of the same graph. Since removing an edge from a Hamiltonian circuit yields a spanning tree, we can expect that the structure of a minimum spanning tree provides a good basis for constructing a shortest tour approximation. Here is an algorithm that implements this idea in a rather straightforward fashion. 

Twice-around-the-tree algorithm

Step 1 Construct a minimum spanning tree of the graph corresponding to a
given instance of the traveling salesman problem.

Step 2 Starting at an arbitrary vertex, perform a walk around the minimum spanning tree recording all the vertices passed by. (This can be done by a DFS traversal.)

Step 3 Scan the vertex list obtained in Step 2 and eliminate from it all repeated occurrences of the same vertex except the starting one at the end of the list. (This step is equivalent to making shortcuts in the walk.) The vertices remaining on the list will form a Hamiltonian circuit, which is the output of the algorithm. 


THEOREM 2 The twice-around-the-tree algorithm is a 2-approximation algorithm for the traveling salesman problem with Euclidean distances. 


Christofides algorithm There is an approximation algorithm with a better performance ratio for the Euclidean traveling salesman problem-the well-known Christofides algorithm [Chr76]. It also uses a minimum spanning tree but does this in a more sophisticated way than the twice-around-the-tree algorithm. Note that a twice-around-the-tree walk generated by the latter algorithm is an Eulerian circuit in the multigraph obtaiued by doubling every edge in the graph given. Recall that an Eulerian circuit exists in a connected multigraph if and only if all its vertices have even degrees. The Christofides algorithm obtains such a multigraph by addiug to the graph the edges of a minimum-weight matchiug of all the
odd-degree vertices in its minimum spanning tree. (The number of such vertices is always even and hence this can always be done.) Then the algorithm finds an Eulerian circuit in the multigraph and transforms it into a Hamiltonian circuit by shortcuts, exactly the same way it is done in the last step of the twice-around-thetree algorithm. 


Local search heuristics 
For Euclidean instances, surprisingly good approximations to optimal tours can be obtained by iterative-improvement algorithms, which ~~ are also called local search heuristics. The best-known of these are the 2-opt, 3-opt, and Lin-Kernighan algorithms. These algorithms start with some initial tour, e.g., constructed randomly or by some simpler approximation algorithm such as the nearest-neighbor. On each iteration, the algorithm explores a neighborhood of the current tour by replacing a few edges in the current tour by other edges. If the changes produce a shorter tour, the algorithm makes it the current tour and continues by exploring its neighborhood in the same manner; otherwise, the current tour is returned as the algorithm's output and the algorithm stops. 


Greedy algorithm for the discrete knapsack problem
Step 1 Compute the value-to-weight ratios r; = v,jw,, i = 1, ... , n, for the items given.

Step 2 Sort the items in nonincreasing order of the ratios computed in Step 1. (Ties can be broken arbitrarily.)

Step 3 Repeat the following operation until no item is left in the sorted list: if the current item on the list fits into the knapsack, place it in the knapsack; otherwise, proceed to the next item. 


Greedy algorithm for the continuous knapsack problem

Step 1 Compute the value-to-weight ratios v;!w,, i = 1, ... , n. for the items given.

Step 2 Sort the items in nonincreasing order of the ratios computed in Step 1. (Ties can be broken arbitrarily.)

Step 3 Repeat the following operation until the knapsack is filled to its full capacity or no item is left in the sorted list: if the current item on the list fits into the knapsack in its entirety, take it and proceed to the next item; otherwise, take its largest fraction to fill the knapsack to its full capacity and stop. 






























