6.6 PROBLEM REDUCTION

Counting Paths in a Graph
As our next example, we consider the problem of counting paths between two
vertices in a graph. It is not difficult to prove by mathematical induction that the number of different paths of length k > 0 from the ith vertex to the jth vertex of a graph (undirected or directed) equals the (i, j)th element of Ak where A is the adjacency matrix of the graph. (Incidentally, the exponentiation algorithms we discussed before for computing powers of numbers are applicable to matrices as well.) Thus, the problem of counting a graph's paths can be solved with an algorithm for computing an appropriate power of its adjacency matrix. 


Reduction of Optimization Problems
Our next example deals with solving optimization problems. If a problem asks to find a maximum of some function, it is said to be a maximization problem; if it asks to find a function's minimum, it is called a minimization problem. Suppose now that you have to find a minimum of some function f (x) and you know an algorithm for maximizing the function. How can you take advantage of the latter? The answer lies in the simple formula
			min f(x) =-max[-f(x)]. 

linear Programming
Many problems of optimal decision making can be reduced to an instance of the linear programming problem, which is a problem of optimizing a linear function of several variables subject to constraints in the form of linear equations and linear inequalities. 


Reduction to Graph Problems
As we mentioned in Section 1.3, many problems can be solved by a reduction to one of the standard graph problems. This is true in particular for a variety of puzzles and games. In these applications, vertices of a graph typically represent possible states of the problem in question while edges indicate permitted transitions among such states. One of the graph's vertices represents an initial state,
while another represents a goal state of the problem. (There might be several vertices of the latter kind.) Such a graph is called a state-space graph. Thus, the transformation just described reduces the problem to the question about a path from the initial-state vertex to a goal-state vertex. 



























